OUR EARTH IS THE ONLY KNOWN
PLANET THAT SUSTAINS LIFE...
AND IT DOES SO
IN ABUNDANCE.
I HAVE BEEN FORTUNATE
ENOUGH OVER THE YEARS
TO TRAVEL TO SOME OF
THE MOST EXTRAORDINARY
AND REMOTE PLACES ON EARTH
TO FIND AND FILM ANIMALS.
THIS IS THE BIGGEST
FLOWER IN THE WORLD.
THE BLUE WHALE!
IT'S THE BIGGEST CREATURE
THAT EXISTS ON THE PLANET.
THE SHEER NUMBER AND
VARIETY OF ANIMALS AND PLANTS
IS ASTONISHING.
ESTIMATES OF THE NUMBER
OF DIFFERENT SPECIES
VARY FROM SIX MILLION
TO 100 MILLION.
NOBODY KNOWS EXACTLY
HOW MANY DIFFERENT KINDS
OF ANIMALS
THERE ARE HERE.
WHEREVER YOU
LOOK THERE'S LIFE.
THERE ARE OFTEN A MULTITUDE OF
VARIATIONS ON A SINGLE PATTERN.
NEARLY 200 DIFFERENT KINDS
OF MONKEYS, FOR EXAMPLE.
AND 315 HUMMINGBIRDS.
NEARLY A THOUSAND BATS.
AND BEETLES - AT LEAST
350,000 SPECIES OF THEM.
NOT TO MENTION A QUARTER
OF A MILLION DIFFERENT KINDS
OF FLOWERING PLANTS.
THE VARIETY IS ASTOUNDING.
EVEN IN THIS ONE SMALL ENGLISH
WOODLAND YOU MIGHT SEE
FOUR OR FIVE DIFFERENT
KINDS OF FINCHES.
WHY SHOULD THERE BE
SUCH A DAZZLING VARIETY?
AND HOW CAN WE MAKE
SENSE OF SUCH A HUGE RANGE
OF LIVING ORGANISMS?
TWO HUNDRED YEARS AGO, A
MAN WAS BORN WHO WAS TO
EXPLAIN THIS ASTONISHING
DIVERSITY OF LIFE.
IN DOING SO, HE
REVOLUTIONIZED THE WAY
IN WHICH WE SEE THE
WORLD AND OUR PLACE IN IT.
HIS NAME WAS
CHARLES DARWIN.
THIS BOOK, THE HOLY
BIBLE, EXPLAINS HOW
THIS WONDERFUL
DIVERSITY CAME ABOUT.
ON THE THIRD DAY, AFTER
THE CREATION OF THE WORLD,
GOD CREATED PLANTS.
ON THE FIFTH DAY
FISH AND BIRDS,
AND THEN ON THE SIXTH DAY
MAMMALS, AND FINALLY MAN.
THAT EXPLANATION WAS BELIEVED
LITERALLY BY PRETTY WELL THE
WHOLE OF WESTERN EUROPE FOR
THE BEST PART OF 2,000 YEARS.
AND GENERATIONS OF PAINTERS
PICTURED IT FOR THE FAITHFUL.
THIS VERSION WAS PAINTED
IN ITALY IN THE 16TH CENTURY.
HERE IS GOD IN THE GARDEN OF
EDEN WHICH IS NOW FILLED WITH
ALL KINDS OF ANIMALS.
HERE HE IS PULLING
ADAM OUT OF THE EARTH.
AND HERE CREATING THE FIRST
WOMAN BY PUTTING ADAM TO SLEEP
AND THEN TAKING
ONE OF HIS RIBS
AND EXTRACTING
EVE FROM HIS SIDE.
AND SHE COMES OUT
ASSISTED BY TWO ANGELS.
AND WHEN GOD HAD FINISHED
HE SAID TO ADAM AND EVE
"BE FRUITFUL AND MULTIPLY
AND REPLENISH THE EARTH
AND SUBDUE IT AND HAVE DOMINION
OVER THE FISH OF THE SEA
AND OVER THE FOWL OF THE AIR
AND OVER EVERY LIVING THING
THAT MOVETH
UPON THE EARTH".
THAT MADE IT CLEAR, THAT
ACCORDING TO THE BIBLE,
HUMANITY COULD EXPLOIT THE
NATURAL WORLD AS THEY WISHED.
THIS VIEW OF MANKIND'S
SUPERIORITY STILL STOOD
WHEN IN 1881 A BRITISH
SURVEYING SHIP, THE BEAGLE,
SET OFF ON A VOYAGE
AROUND THE WORLD.
ON BOARD, AS A
COMPANION TO THE CAPTAIN,
WAS THE 22-YEAR-OLD
CHARLES DARWIN.
THEY CROSSED THE ATLANTIC
AND MADE LANDFALL
ON THE COAST
OF BRAZIL.
THERE THE SHEER ABUNDANCE
OF TROPICAL NATURE
ASTONISHES THE NEWCOMER
AS I DISCOVERED WHEN I
RETRACED DARWIN'S STEPS
30 YEARS AGO FOR A
TELEVISION SERIES ABOUT
THE DIVERSITY OF NATURE.
DARWIN AS A BOY HAD BEEN A
FANATICAL COLLECTOR OF INSECTS,
AND HERE HE WAS ENTHRALLED
ALMOST TO THE POINT OF ECSTASY.
IN ONE DAY IN A SMALL AREA
HE DISCOVERED 69 DIFFERENT
SPECIES OF BEETLE.
AS HE WROTE IN HIS JOURNAL,
"IT'S ENOUGH TO DISTURB THE
COMPOSURE OF THE
ENTOMOLOGIST'S MIND
TO CONTEMPLATE THE
FUTURE DIMENSION
OF A COMPLETE
CATALOG".
THEY WENT SOUTH,
ROUNDED CAPE HORN,
AND SO REACHED
THE PACIFIC.
AND THEN, IN SEPTEMBER 1835,
AFTER THEY'D BEEN AWAY FOR
ALMOST FOUR YEARS, THEY LANDED
ON THE LITTLE KNOWN ISLANDS
OF THE GALAPAGOS.
HERE THEY FOUND CREATURES
THAT EXISTED NOWHERE ELSE
IN THE WORLD.
CORMORANTS THAT HAD
LOST THE POWER TO FLIGHT.
LIZARDS THAT SWAM
OUT THROUGH THE SURF
TO GRAZE ON THE
BOTTOM OF THE SEA.
THE BRITISH RESIDENT IN THE
GALAPAGOS CLAIMED THAT
HE KNEW FROM THE SHAPE
OF A GIANT TORTOISE'S SHELL
WHICH ISLAND IT
HAD COME FROM.
IF IT HAD A ROUNDED FRONT IT
CAME FROM A WELL-WATERED ISLAND
WHERE IT FED ON
LUSH GROUND PLANTS.
WHEREAS ONE FROM A DRY
ISLAND HAD A PEAK AT THE FRONT
WHICH ENABLED IT TO REACH
UP TO HIGHER VEGETATION.
WERE THESE TORTOISES EACH
ON THEIR SEPARATE ISLANDS
DIFFERENT SPECIES?
AND IF SO, WAS EACH
ONE A SEPARATE ACT
OF DIVINE CREATION?
THE DIFFERENCES THAT DARWIN
HAD NOTICED AMONGST THESE
GALAPAGOS ANIMALS WERE,
OF COURSE, ALL TINY.
BUT IF THEY COULD DEVELOP,
WASN'T IT POSSIBLE THAT OVER THE
THOUSANDS OR MILLIONS OF YEARS A
WHOLE SERIES OF SUCH DIFFERENCES
MIGHT ADD UP TO ONE
REVOLUTIONARY CHANGE?
ON HIS VOYAGE HOME DARWIN HAD
TIME TO PONDER ON THESE THINGS.
COULD IT BE THAT SPECIES
WERE NOT FIXED FOR ALL TIME,
BUT COULD IN FACT
SLOWLY CHANGE?
ON HIS RETURN HE
SORTED OUT HIS SPECIMENS
AND SENT THEM OFF
TO RELEVANT EXPERTS
SO THAT EACH COULD BE
IDENTIFIED AND CLASSIFIED.
MOST OF THE MAMMAL BONES AND
FOSSILS HE SENT TO RICHARD OWEN.
OWEN WAS ONE OF THE
MOST BRILLIANT ZOOLOGISTS
OF HIS TIME.
HE WAS THE FIRST TO
RECOGNIZE DINOSAURS
AND INDEED HAD INVENTED
THEIR VERY NAME.
AND HE WOULD LATER BECOME
THE CREATOR AND FIRST DIRECTOR
OF THE NATURAL HISTORY
MUSEUM IN LONDON.
MANY OF THE SPECIMENS THAT
DARWIN COLLECTED ARE STILL
PRESERVED AND TREASURED HERE
AMONG THE 17 MILLION OTHER
SPECIMENS HOUSED IN THE
MUSEUM THAT OWEN FOUNDED.
AND HERE IS
ONE OF THEM...
IT'S OBVIOUSLY THE LOWER
JAW OF SOME GREAT ANIMAL,
AND WHEN DARWIN DISCOVERED
IT, IT HAD BITS OF SKIN
AND HAIR ATTACHED TO IT
SO AT FIRST IT WAS THOUGHT
THEY WERE THE REMAINS
OF SOME LIVING SPECIES.
BUT NOW WE KNOW THAT IT IS
A SPECIES THAT WAS EXTINCT
FOR SOME 10,000 YEARS:
A GIANT GROUND SLOTH.
OWEN EXAMINED IT IN GREAT DETAIL
AND EVENTUALLY DESCRIBED IT
AND GAVE IT THE NAME
OF MYLODON DARWINII
IN HONOR OF
ITS DISCOVERER.
BUT THAT MUTUAL RESPECT BETWEEN
TWO GREAT MEN OF SCIENCE
WAS NOT TO LAST.
SOON AFTER HIS RETURN FROM HIS
VOYAGE DARWIN MADE HIS HOME
HERE IN DOWN
HOUSE IN KENT.
HERE HE WROTE AN ACCOUNT OF HIS
TRAVELS AND WORKED ON DETAILED
SCIENTIFIC TREATISES ABOUT
CORALS AND BARNACLES
AND THE GEOLOGY AND
FOSSILS OF SOUTH AMERICA.
BUT HE ALSO PONDERED
DEEPLY ON WHAT HE HAD SEEN
IN THE GALAPAGOS
AND ELSEWHERE.
MAYBE SPECIES
WERE NOT FIXED...
EVERY DAY HE TOOK A WALK
IN THIS SMALL SPINNEY
THAT HE HAD PLANTED AT
THE END OF HIS GARDEN.
AND IT WAS HERE THAT HE CAME
TO PONDER ON THE PROBLEMS
OF NATURAL HISTORY INCLUDING
THAT MYSTERY OF MYSTERIES:
HOW COULD ONE SPECIES
TURN INTO ANOTHER?
HE NOTED THAT MOST IF NOT ALL
ANIMALS PRODUCE MANY MORE YOUNG
THAN LIVE TO
BREED THEMSELVES.
THIS FEMALE BLUE TIT,
FOR EXAMPLE, MAY WELL LAY
A DOZEN EGGS A YEAR, PERHAPS
50 OR SO IN HER LIFETIME,
YET ONLY TWO OF HER CHICKS NEED
TO SURVIVE AND BREED THEMSELVES
TO MAINTAIN THE NUMBERS
OF THE BLUE TIT POPULATION.
THOSE SURVIVORS, OF COURSE,
ARE LIKELY TO BE THE HEALTHIEST
AND BEST SUITED TO THEIR
PARTICULAR ENVIRONMENT.
THEIR CHARACTERISTICS
ARE THEN INHERITED.
SO PERHAPS OVER MANY GENERATIONS
AND PARTICULARLY IF THERE ARE
ENVIRONMENTAL CHANGES,
SPECIES MAY WELL CHANGE.
ONLY THE FITTEST SURVIVE,
AND THAT WAS THE KEY.
HE CALLED THE PROCESS
"NATURAL SELECTION".
THAT WOULD EXPLAIN THE
DIFFERENCES HE HAD NOTED
IN THE FINCHES HE HAD BROUGHT
BACK FROM THE GALAPAGOS.
THEY WERE VERY SIMILAR
EXCEPT FOR THEIR BEAKS.
THIS ONE HAS A VERY
THIN, DELICATE BEAK
WHICH IT USES
TO CATCH INSECTS.
THIS ONE, ON THE OTHER HAND,
WHICH CAME FROM AN ENVIRONMENT
WHERE THERE WERE A LOT OF
NUTS, HAS A BIG, HEAVY BEAK
WHICH ENABLES
IT TO CRACK THEM.
SO MAYBE OVER THE VASTNESS
OF GEOLOGICAL TIME,
AND PARTICULARLY IF SPECIES
WERE INVADING NEW ENVIRONMENTS,
THOSE CHANGES WOULD AMOUNT
TO VERY RADICAL CHANGES INDEED.
DARWIN DREW A SKETCH IN ONE
OF HIS NOTEBOOKS TO ILLUSTRATE
HIS IDEA, SHOWING HOW A
SINGLE ANCESTRAL SPECIES
MIGHT GIVE RISE TO
SEVERAL DIFFERENT ONES.
AND THEN WROTE ABOVE
IT A TENTATIVE "I THINK".
NOW HE HAD TO
PROVE HIS THEORY.
AND HE SPENT YEARS
GATHERING ABUNDANT
AND CONVINCING
EVIDENCE.
HE WAS AN EXTRAORDINARY
LETTER WRITER.
HE WROTE AS MANY AS A DOZEN
LETTERS A DAY TO SCIENTISTS
AND NATURALISTS
ALL OVER THE WORLD.
HE ALSO REALIZED THAT WHEN
PEOPLE HAD FIRST STARTED
DOMESTICATING ANIMALS THEY HAD
BEEN DOING EXPERIMENTS FOR HIM
FOR CENTURIES.
ALL DOMESTIC DOGS ARE DESCENDED
FROM A SINGLE ANCESTRAL SPECIES
- THE WOLF.
DOG BREEDERS SELECT THOSE PUPS
THAT HAVE THE CHARACTERISTICS
THAT HAPPEN
TO PLEASE THEM.
NATURE, OF COURSE, SELECTS
THOSE YOUNG ANIMALS
THAT ARE BEST SUITED TO A
PARTICULAR ENVIRONMENT,
BUT THE PROCESS IS
ESSENTIALLY THE SAME
AND IN BOTH CASES IT HAS
PRODUCED ASTONISHING VARIETY.
IN EFFECT, MANY OF
THESE DIFFERENT BREEDS
COULD BE CONSIDERED
DIFFERENT SPECIES BECAUSE
THEY DO NOT - INDEED
THEY CANNOT - INTERBREED.
FOR PURELY MECHANICAL
REASONS THERE'S NO WAY
IN WHICH A PEKINGESE CAN
MATE WITH A GREAT DANE.
OF COURSE IT'S TRUE THAT IF YOU
USED ARTIFICIAL INSEMINATION
YOU COULD GET CROSSES BETWEEN
ALMOST ANY OF THESE BREEDS
BUT THAT'S BECAUSE HUMAN
BEINGS HAVE BEEN SELECTING
BETWEEN DOGS FOR
ONLY A FEW CENTURIES.
NATURE HAS BEEN SELECTING
BETWEEN ANIMALS
FOR MILLIONS OF YEARS.
TENS OF MILLIONS, EVEN HUNDREDS
OF MILLIONS OF YEARS.
SO WHAT MIGHT HAVE STARTED OUT
AS WE WOULD CONSIDER TO BE
BREEDS HAVE NOW BECOME SO
DIFFERENT THEY ARE SPECIES.
DARWIN, SITTING IN DOWN HOUSE,
WROTE TO PIGEON FANCIERS AND
RABBIT BREEDERS ASKING ALL
KINDS OF DETAILED QUESTIONS
ABOUT THEIR
METHODS AND RESULTS.
HE HIMSELF, BEING A COUNTRY
GENTLEMAN AND RUNNING AN ESTATE,
KNEW ABOUT BREEDING HORSES AND
SHEEP AND CATTLE AND HE ALSO
CONDUCTED CAREFUL EXPERIMENTS
WITH PLANTS IN HIS GREENHOUSE.
BUT THE IDEA THAT SPECIES
COULD APPEAR WITHOUT DIVINE
INTERVENTION WAS CONTRARY TO
THE BELIEFS OF HIS WIFE, EMMA.
SHE WAS A DEVOUT CHRISTIAN AND
DARWIN KNEW THAT HIS THEORY
WOULD MOST CERTAINLY
APPALL SOCIETY IN GENERAL.
PERHAPS FOR THAT REASON HE
KEPT ON REFINING HIS THEORY
AND DELAYING
PUBLICATION.
BUT THEN HIS
HAND WAS FORCED.
IN JUNE 1858, 22 YEARS AFTER HE
GOT BACK FROM THE GALAPAGOS,
HERE IN HIS STUDY IN DOWN HE
RECEIVED A PACKAGE FROM A
NATURALIST WHO WAS WORKING
IN WHAT IS NOW INDONESIA.
HIS NAME WAS ALFRED
RUSSELL WALLACE.
HE HAD BEEN CORRESPONDING
WITH DARWIN FOR SOME YEARS.
BUT THIS PACKAGE
WAS DIFFERENT.
IT CONTAINED AN ESSAY THAT
SET OUT EXACTLY THE SAME IDEA
AS DARWIN'S - OF EVOLUTION
BY NATURAL SELECTION.
THE IDEA HAD COME TO
WALLACE AS HE LAY IN HIS HUT
SEMI-DELIROUS IN
A MALARIAL FEVER.
BUT ALTHOUGH HIS IDEA OF
NATURAL SELECTION WAS THE
SAME AS DARWIN'S, HE HAD NOT
SPENT 20 YEARS GATHERING THE
MOUNTAIN OF EVIDENCE TO
SUPPORT IT AS DARWIN HAD DONE.
BUT WHO'S IDEA WAS IT?
IN THE END THE SENIOR
MEMBERS OF THE LINNAEAN,
A SCIENTIFIC
SOCIETY IN LONDON,
DECIDED THAT THE FAIREST
THING WAS FOR A BRIEF OUTLINE
OF THEIR THEORIES TO BE READ
OUT ONE AFTER THE OTHER.
NEITHER DARWIN NOR WALLACE
ATTENDED SO THE TWO PAPERS
WERE READ BY THE SECRETARY,
AND AS FAR AS WE CAN TELL
THEY MADE VERY LITTLE
IMPRESSION ON ANYONE.
DARWIN SPENT THE NEXT
YEAR WRITING OUT HIS THEORY
IN DETAIL, THEN HE SENT THE
MANUSCRIPT TO HIS PUBLISHER,
JOHN MURRAY, WHO'S FIRM,
THEN AS NOW, HAD OFFICES
IN ALBEMARLE STREET JUST
OFF PICCADILLY IN LONDON.
THE FIRST EDITION OF 1,250
COPIES SOLD OUT IMMEDIATELY
AND IT WENT FOR A REPRINT
AND ANOTHER REPRINT
AND ANOTHER REPRINT.
IT'S A BOOK THAT CONTAINS
VERY FEW TECHNICAL TERMS.
IT'S EASILY
UNDERSTOOD BY ANYBODY.
AND PREDICTABLY IT CAUSED AN
OUTRAGE, NOT ONLY THROUGHOUT
THIS COUNTRY, BUT INDEED
ALL THE CIVILIZED WORLD.
WHAT SCANDALIZED PEOPLE MOST,
IT SEEMS, WAS THE IMPLICATION
THAT HUMAN BEINGS WERE NOT
SPECIALLY CREATED BY GOD
AS THE BOOK OF GENESIS
STATED, BUT WERE DESCENDED
FROM APE-LIKE ANCESTORS:
A NOTION THAT PROVIDED
A LOT OF SCOPE
FOR CARTOONISTS.
THE LEADERS OF THE CHURCH,
HEADED BY SAMUEL WILBERFORCE,
THE BISHOP OF OXFORD,
ATTACKED IT ON THE GROUNDS
THAT IT DEMOTED GOD AND
CONTRADICTED THE STORY
OF CREATION AS
TOLD BY THE BIBLE.
"THAT MR. DARWIN SHOULD
HAVE WANDERED FROM THIS
BROAD HIGHWAY OF NATURE'S
WORKS INTO THE JUNGLE OF
FANCIFUL ASSUMPTION
IS NO SMALL EVIL".
"I HAVE READ YOUR BOOK WITH
MORE PAIN THAN PLEASURE".
"IT IS THE FRENZIED INSPIRATION
OF THE INHALER OF MEPHITIC GAS."
"FAILS UTTERLY".
DARWIN'S THEORY IMPLIED THAT
LIFE ORIGINATED IN SIMPLE FORMS
AND HAD THEN BECOME
MORE AND MORE COMPLEX.
HE KNEW PERFECTLY WELL THAT
THE WHOLE IDEA OF EVOLUTION
RAISED A LOT
OF QUESTIONS.
IN FACT, SOME OF THOSE
QUESTIONS WOULD NOT
BE ANSWERED UNTIL
COMPARATIVELY RECENTLY.
BUT IN HIS OWN TIME MANY
DISTINGUISHED SCIENTISTS
RAISED WHAT SEEMED TO BE
INSUPERABLE DIFFICULTIES.
AND FOREMOST AMONG
THEM WAS RICHARD OWEN,
THE MAN WHO 20 YEARS
EARLIER HAD NAMED THE
EXTINCT GROUND SLOTH
IN HONOR OF DARWIN.
OVER THE YEARS THE TWO MEN HAD
DEVELOPED A DEEP PERSONAL
DISLIKE OF ONE ANOTHER AND
HAD QUARRELED FREQUENTLY.
IT WASN'T THAT OWEN
THOUGHT THAT THE STORY
OF THE GARDEN OF EDEN
WAS LITERALLY CORRECT,
BUT NONETHELESS HE WAS
A DEEPLY RELIGIOUS MAN.
HE HAD, AFTERALL, ENSURED THAT
HIS MUSEUM, WHICH WOULD DISPLAY
THE WONDERS OF CREATION,
ECHOED IN ITS DESIGN
THE GREAT CHRISTIAN
CATHEDRALS OF MEDIEVAL EUROPE.
AND OWEN KNEW ABOUT
THE DIVERSITY OF LIFE.
INDEED, HE HAD SPENT HIS
WHOLE CAREER CATALOGING IT.
BUT EVEN SO, HE REFUSED
TO BELIEVE THAT A SPECIES
COULD CHANGE
OVER TIME.
HE AND OTHER PIONEER VICTORIAN
GEOLOGISTS, AS THEY ESTABLISHED
THEIR COMPARATIVELY NEW SCIENCE,
RECOGNIZED THAT THE OUTLINES
OF THE HISTORY OF LIFE COULD
BE DEDUCED BY EXAMINING
THE LAND AROUND THEM.
LOOK AT THESE ROCKS
IN NORTHERN SCOTLAND.
WE KNOW FROM FOSSILS THAT
ARE ASSOCIATED WITH THEM
THAT THEY ARE
VERY ANCIENT.
AND THEY ARE SANDSTONES,
COMPACTED SAND THAT WAS LAID
DOWN AT THE BOTTOM OF THE SEA
LAYER UPON LAYER UPON LAYER.
BUT LOOK HOW MANY
LAYERS THERE ARE!
CLEARLY THOSE AT THE TOP
MUST HAVE BEEN LAID DOWN
AFTER THOSE
BENEATH THEM.
SO AS YOU DESCEND
FROM LAYER TO LAYER,
YOU ARE IN EFFECT
GOING BACK IN TIME.
SO A FOSSIL SPECIES, IF IT
COMES FROM A PARTICULAR LAYER,
IS OF A PARTICULAR AGE.
AND IF YOU CAN RECOGNIZE
EACH ONE, THEN YOU CAN BEGIN
TO PIECE TOGETHER THE
OUTLINES OF LIFE'S HISTORY.
OWEN DID NOT DENY THE SEQUENCE
IN WHICH ALL THESE DIFFERENT
SPECIES APPEARED, BUT HE
BELIEVED THAT EACH WAS SEPARATE,
EACH DIVINELY CREATED.
DARWIN'S THEORY, HOWEVER,
REQUIRED THAT THERE SHOULD BE
CONNECTIONS NOT JUST
BETWEEN SIMILAR SPECIES
BUT BETWEEN THE
GREAT ANIMAL GROUPS.
IF FISHES AND REPTILES AND BIRDS
AND MAMMALS HAD ALL EVOLVED
FROM ONE ANOTHER, THEN
SURELY THERE MUST BE
INTERMEDIATE FORMS BETWEEN
THOSE GREAT GROUPS.
AND THEY WERE MISSING.
AND THEN JUST TWO YEARS
AFTER THE PUBLICATION OF
THE ORIGIN OF SPECIES RICHARD
OWEN HIMSELF PURCHASED
THE MOST ASTONISHING
FOSSIL FOR HIS MUSEUM.
IT HAD BEEN FOUND IN THIS
LIMESTONE QUARRY IN BAVARIA.
THE STONE HERE SPLITS INTO
FLAT, SMOOTH LEAVES THAT
HAVE BEEN USED AS ROOFING
TILES SINCE ROMAN TIMES.
MOST ARE BLANK, BUT OCCASIONALLY
WHEN YOU SPLIT THEM APART
THEY REVEAL A
SHRIMP OR A FISH.
IT'S ALMOST IMPOSSIBLE TO RESIST
THE TEMPTATION OF PULLING DOWN
ALMOST EVERY BOULDER YOU SEE
AND THEN OPENING IT LIKE A BOOK
TO LOOK AT EACH UNOPENED
PAGE TO SEE WHETHER
MAYBE IT CONTAINS
YET ANOTHER FOSSIL.
BUT THIS FOSSIL WAS SOMETHING
UNPRECEDENTED.
IT IS STILL ONE OF THE
GREATEST OF THE TREASURES
THAT ARE STORED IN THE
NATURAL HISTORY MUSEUM.
AND THIS IS IT.
IT'S CALLED
"ARCHAEOPTERYX".
IT HAS UNMISTAKABLE FEATHERS
ON ITS WINGS AND DOWN ITS TAIL.
SO OWEN HAD NO HESITATION
IN CALLING IT A BIRD,
BUT IT WAS UNLIKE ANY OTHER
BIRD THAT ANYONE KNEW OF
BECAUSE IT HAD CLAWS ON
THE FRONT OF ITS WINGS,
AND AS WAS
LATER DISCOVERED,
IT DIDN'T HAVE A BEAK BUT
JAWS WITH TEETH IN IT,
AND A LINE OF BONES
SUPPORTING ITS TAIL.
SO IT WAS PART
REPTILE, PART BIRD.
HERE WAS THE LINK BETWEEN
THOSE TWO GREAT GROUPS
THAT WAS NO
LONGER MISSING.
GOSH, YOU REALLY CAN SEE
THE FILAMENTS THERE.
OTHER EXAMPLES OF THE SAME
CREATURE SHOW ITS FEATHERS
EVEN MORE CLEARLY.
WE KNOW FROM THE BONES OF
ARCHAEOPTERYX THAT IT WAS
AT BEST A VERY
POOR FLIER.
SO IT'S NOT SURPRISING THAT
EVENTUALLY IT WAS SUPERSEDED
BY MORE MODERN, MORE
EFFICIENT BIRDS, AND THAT'S
THE FATE OF THESE LINKS
BETWEEN GREAT GROUPS.
EVENTUALLY THEY BECOME EXTINCT
AND THE ONLY WAY WE KNOW
THEY EXISTED IS FROM
THEIR FOSSILIZED REMAINS.
EVEN SO, THERE IS A BIRD ALIVE
TODAY THAT ILLUSTRATES THE LINK
BETWEEN MODERN
BIRDS AND REPTILES.
THE HOATZIN NESTS IN THE SWAMPS
OF TROPICAL SOUTH AMERICA.
THERE ARE CAIMAN IN THE
WATER BENEATH, READY TO
SNAP UP ANY CHICK THAT
MIGHT FALL FROM ITS NEST
SO AN ABILITY TO HOLD ON
TIGHT IS VERY VALUABLE.
AND THE NESTLINGS HAVE A VERY
INTERESTING WAY OF DOING THAT.
THE YOUNG STILL HAVE CLAWS
ON THE FRONT OF THEIR WINGS
AS ARCHAEOPTERYX DID.
HERE IS VIVID EVIDENCE THAT THE
WINGS OF BIRDS ARE MODIFIED
FORELEGS AND ONCE HAD
TOES WITH CLAWS ON THEM.
ALTHOUGH THE FOSSIL RECORD
PROVIDES AN ANSWER TO THE
PROBLEM OF MISSING LINKS, IT
ALSO POSED A MAJOR PROBLEM.
IT STARTED
VERY ABRUPTLY.
THE EARLIEST KNOWN
FOSSILS IN DARWIN'S TIME
CAME FROM A FORMATION
CALLED THE CAMBRIAN.
AND THERE WERE TWO MAIN
KINDS: THESE WHICH LOOK LIKE
FRET-SAW BLADES ARE CALLED
GRAPTOLITES; AND THESE,
LIKE GIANT WOOD LICE, WHICH
ARE CALLED TRILOBITES.
COULD IT REALLY BE THAT LIFE ON
EARTH STARTED WITH CREATURES
AS COMPLEX AS THESE?
AS A BOY I WAS A PASSIONATE
COLLECTOR OF FOSSILS.
I GREW UP IN THE CITY OF
LEICESTER AND I KNEW THAT IN
THIS AREA NOT FAR FROM THE
CITY CALLED CHARNWOOD FOREST
THERE WERE THE OLDEST
ROCKS IN THE WORLD.
OLDER EVEN THAN
THE CAMBRIAN.
SO THEREFORE, BY DEFINITION,
THEY WOULD BE WITHOUT FOSSILS.
THERE WAS NO POINT IN
ME LOOKING FOR FOSSILS
IN THESE
ANCIENT ROCKS.
THERE WERE, IT'S TRUE, VERY
RARELY SOME RATHER ODD SHAPES
IN THESE ROCKS -
LIKE THIS ONE HERE.
BUT THEY WERE DISMISSED
AS BEING SOME KIND OF
MECHANICAL ABERRATION.
I MEAN, AFTERALL, HOW COULD
THERE BE ANYTHING LIVING
IN THESE EXTREMELY
ANCIENT ROCKS?
AND THEN IN 1957 A SCHOOL BOY,
WITH RATHER MORE PATIENCE AND
PERSPICACITY THAN I HAD, FOUND
SOMETHING REALLY REMARKABLE
AND UNDENIABLY THE
REMAINS OF A LIVING CREATURE.
AND HERE IT IS IN LEICESTER
MUSEUM WHERE IT'S BEEN BROUGHT
FOR SAFE KEEPING.
IT'S CALLED CHARNIA.
WHO COULD DOUBT THAT THIS IS THE
IMPRESSION OF A LIVING ORGANISM?
IT HAS A CENTRAL STEM,
BRANCHES ON EITHER SIDE.
IN FACT, IT SEEMS TO HAVE BEEN
SOMETHING LIKE THE SEA PENS
THAT TODAY GROW
ON CORAL REEFS.
SINCE ITS DISCOVERY A
WHOLE RANGE OF ORGANISMS
HAVE BEEN FOUND IN ROCKS
OF THIS EXTREME AGE -
NOT ONLY HERE IN THE
CHARNWOOD FOREST
BUT IN MANY OTHER DIFFERENT
PARTS OF THE WORLD.
FOSSIL HUNTERS
SEARCHING THESE ROCKS
IN THE EDIACARA HILLS
OF AUSTRALIA HAD ALSO
BEEN DISCOVERING
OTHER STRANGE SHAPES.
AT FIRST MANY SCIENTISTS
REFUSED TO BELIEVE THAT
THESE FAINT IMPRESSIONS
WERE THE REMAINS OF JELLYFISH.
BUT BY NOW ENOUGH SPECIMENS
HAVE BEEN DISCOVERED
TO MAKE QUITE SURE THAT
THAT INDEED IS WHAT THEY ARE.
SO NOW WE KNOW THAT LIFE DID
NOT BEGIN SUDDENLY WITH THOSE
COMPLEX ANIMALS OF THE CAMBRIAN;
IT STARTED MUCH, MUCH EARLIER.
FIRST WITH SIMPLE MICROSCOPIC
FORMS WHICH EVENTUALLY BECAME
BIGGER BUT WHICH WERE
STILL SO SOFT AND DELICATE
THAT THEY ONLY VERY RARELY
LEFT ANY MARK ON THE ROCKS.
THE QUESTION OF THE AGE OF THE
EARTH POSED ANOTHER PROBLEM
FOR DARWIN'S THEORY.
IN THE 17TH CENTURY AN IRISH
BISHOP HAD USED THE GENEALOGIES
RECORDED IN THE BIBLE THAT LEAD
BACK TO ADAM TO WORK OUT THAT
THE WEEK OF CREATION MUST HAVE
TAKEN PLACE IN THE YEAR 4004 BC.
THAT MAY SEEM TO US TO BE A
VERY NAIVE WAY OF DOING THINGS,
BUT WHAT OTHER METHOD
WAS THERE ANYWAY?
THE VICTORIAN GEOLOGISTS
HAD ALREADY CONCLUDED
THAT THE EARTH MUST BE
MILLIONS OF YEARS OLD,
BUT HOW MANY MILLIONS
NO ONE COULD SAY.
THEN, LESS THAN 50 YEARS AFTER
THE PUBLICATION OF THE ORIGIN,
A DISCOVERY WAS MADE IN WHAT
SEEMED A TOTALLY DISCONNECTED
BRANCH OF SCIENCE THAT WOULD
ULTIMATELY PROVIDE THE ANSWER.
A POLISH WOMAN WORKING
IN PARIS, MARIE CURIE,
DISCOVERED THAT SOME
ROCKS CONTAINED AN ELEMENT
CALLED URANIUM THAT
DECAYS OVER TIME
AT A STEADY RATE THROUGH A
PROCESS CALLED "RADIATION".
TODAY, A CENTURY AFTER SHE MADE
HER EXTRAORDINARY DISCOVERY,
THE METHOD OF DATING
BY MEASURING CHANGES
IN RADIOACTIVITY HAS
BECOME GREATLY REFINED.
THIS IS A SAMPLE TAKEN FROM
THOSE VERY ANCIENT ROCKS
IN CHARNWOOD FOREST.
AND THESE TINY CRYSTALS
ARE REVEALED TO BE
562 MILLION YEARS OLD.
THAT PROVIDES MORE THAN ENOUGH
TIME FOR NATURAL SELECTION
TO PRODUCE THE PROCESSION OF
FOSSILS THAT EVENTUALLY LEADS
TO THE LIVING ANIMALS AND
PLANTS WE KNOW TODAY.
BUT THERE WAS
ANOTHER OBJECTION.
IF ALL ANIMALS WITHIN A
GROUP HAVE A COMMON ORIGIN,
HOW IS IT THAT SOME KINDS
OF ANIMALS ARE DISTRIBUTED
THROUGHOUT THE
CONTINENTS OF THE WORLD -
EXCEPT FOR ANTARCTICA?
HOW IS IT THAT FROGS IN EUROPE
AND AFRICA ARE ALSO FOUND HERE
IN SOUTH AMERICA ON THE OTHER
SIDE OF THE ATLANTIC OCEAN?
BEARING IN MIND THAT FROGS
HAVE PERMEABLE SKINS
AND CAN'T SURVIVE
IN SEAWATER.
DARWIN HIMSELF HAD A
COUPLE OF SUGGESTIONS.
ONE WAS THEY MIGHT HAVE
FLOATED ACROSS ACCIDENTALLY
ON RAFTS OF VEGETATION,
AND THE OTHER IS THAT MAYBE
THERE WERE LAND BRIDGES
BETWEEN THE CONTINENTS.
BUT EVEN HE WAS NOT CONVINCED
BY EITHER EXPLANATION.
BUT THEN IN THE 1960'S IT BECAME
POSSIBLE TO MAP THE SEA FLOOR
IN DETAIL.
AND IT WAS DISCOVERED NOT
ONLY THAT THE CONTINENTS
HAVE SHIFTED, BUT THAT
THEY WERE STILL MOVING.
NEW ROCK WELLS UP FROM
DEEP BELOW THE EARTH'S CRUST
AND FLOWS AWAY ON EITHER
SIDE OF THE MID OCEAN RIDGES,
CARRYING THE
CONTINENTS WITH IT.
AMPHIBIANS HAD ORIGINALLY
EVOLVED ON THIS SUPERCONTINENT
AND HAD THEN TRAVELED ON
EACH OF ITS VARIOUS FRAGMENTS
AS THEY DRIFTED APART.
PROBLEM SOLVED.
PERHAPS THE BIGGEST PROBLEM
OF ALL FOR MOST PEOPLE WAS
THE ARGUMENT PUT FORWARD
FOR THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
AT THE BEGINNING OF
THE 19TH CENTURY
BY AN ANGLICAN CLERGYMAN
CALLED WILLIAM PALEY.
HE SAID SUPPOSING YOU WERE
WALKING IN THE COUNTRYSIDE
AND YOU PICKED UP
SOMETHING LIKE THIS.
YOU WOULD KNOW FROM
LOOKING AT IT THAT IT HAD
BEEN DESIGNED
TO TELL THE TIME.
THERE MUST, THEREFORE,
BE A DESIGNER.
AND THE SAME ARGUMENT WOULD
APPLY IF YOU LOOKED AT ONE OF
THE INTRICATE STRUCTURES FOUND
IN NATURE SUCH AS THE HUMAN EYE.
AND THE ONLY DESIGNER OF
THE HUMAN EYE COULD BE GOD.
ANTI-EVOLUTIONISTS MAINTAIN
THAT THE EYE WOULD ONLY WORK
IF IT WAS COMPLETE
IN ALL ITS DETAILS.
DARWIN, ON THE OTHER HAND,
ARGUED THAT THE EYE DEVELOPED,
BECOMING INCREASINGLY COMPLEX
OVER A LONG PERIOD OF TIME.
THAT WOULD ONLY WORK IF
EACH STAGE OF DEVELOPMENT
WAS AN IMPROVEMENT
ON THE PREVIOUS ONE.
AND TODAY WE KNOW ENOUGH
ABOUT THE ANIMAL KINGDOM
TO KNOW THAT THAT
IS INDEED THE CASE.
SOME VERY SIMPLE ANIMALS
HAVE NOTHING MORE THAN
LIGHT-SENSITIVE SPOTS
THAT ENABLE THEM TO
TELL THE DIFFERENCE
BETWEEN LIGHT AND DARK.
BUT IF A PATCH OF SUCH SPOTS
FORMED EVEN THE SHALLOWEST
OF PITS, ONE EDGE OF THE
PIT WOULD THROW A SHADOW,
AND SO REVEAL THE
DIRECTION OF LIGHT.
IF THE PIT GOT DEEPER
AND STARTED TO CLOSE,
THEN LIGHT WOULD
FORM A BLURRED IMAGE.
MUCUS SECRETED BY THE
CELLS WOULD BEND THE LIGHT
AND FOCUS IT.
IF THIS MUCUS HARDENED IT
WOULD FORM A PROPER LENS
AND TRANSMIT A BRIGHTER
AND CLEARER IMAGE.
ALL THESE DIFFERENT, FULLY
FUNCTIONAL STAGES AT DIFFERENT
LEVELS OF COMPLEXITY ARE
FOUND IN LIVING ANIMALS TODAY.
THIS SINGLE-CELLED
CREATURE HAS ONE OF THOSE
LIGHT-SENSITIVE SPOTS.
FLATWORMS HAVE A SMALL PIT
CONTAINING LIGHT SPOTS
SO THEY CAN DETECT THE
SHADOW OF A PREDATOR.
A SNAIL'S BLURRY VISION IS
GOOD ENOUGH TO ENABLE IT
TO FIND ITS
WAY TO FOOD.
AND THE OCTOPUS HAS AN
EYE WITH A PROPER LENS
AND CAN SEE AS MUCH
DETAIL AS WE CAN.
SO THE STRUCTURE OF THE HUMAN
EYE DOES NOT DEMAND THE
ASSISTANCE OF A SUPERNATURAL
DESIGNER, IT CAN HAVE EVOLVED
GRADUALLY WITH EACH STAGE
BRINGING A REAL ADVANTAGE,
AS DARWIN'S
THEORY DEMANDS.
NATURAL SELECTION, OF COURSE,
REQUIRES THAT AN ANIMAL'S
CHARACTERISTICS ARE HANDED FROM
ONE GENERATION TO THE NEXT.
IT'S OBVIOUS THAT CHILDREN
RESEMBLE THEIR PARENTS;
ANYONE KNOWS THAT.
BUT WHEN YOU COME TO THINK OF
IT, HOW DOES THAT COME ABOUT?
IN DARWIN'S TIME NOBODY HAD
THE FAINTEST IDEA ABOUT THE
MECHANISM OR THE RULES
THAT GOVERN THAT PROCESS.
EXCEPT PERHAPS FOR ONE MAN
WHO WAS WORKING IN THE CITY
OF BRNO IN WHAT IS
NOW THE CZECH REPUBLIC
AT EXACTLY THE SAME TIME
THAT DARWIN WAS WRITING
HIS BOOK IN KENT.
THAT MAN'S NAME
WAS GREGOR MENDEL.
HE DISCOVERED THE LAWS OF
INHERITANCE BY BREEDING
THOUSANDS OF PEA PLANTS AND
OBSERVING HOW THEY CHANGE
FROM ONE GENERATION
TO THE NEXT.
HE FOUND THAT WHILE
MANY CHARACTERISTICS WERE
PASSED DOWN DIRECTLY FROM
ONE GENERATION TO ANOTHER,
OTHERS COULD ACTUALLY
SKIP A GENERATION.
HOW COULD
THAT HAPPEN?
MENDEL EXPLAINED THIS BY
SUGGESTING THAT EACH PLANT,
EACH ORGANISM
CONTAINED WITHIN IT
FACTORS WHICH
WERE RESPONSIBLE
FOR CREATING THOSE
PARTICULAR CHARACTERISTICS.
TODAY WE CALL THOSE THINGS
"GENES", BUT NOBODY HAD ANY IDEA
HOW THEY WORKED UNTIL 100
YEARS AFTER MENDEL'S TIME.
AND THEN THE ANSWER WAS
DISCOVERED IN CAMBRIDGE.
IN 1953 HERE IN THE
CAVENDISH LABORATORIES,
TWO YOUNG RESEARCHERS,
FRANCIS CRICK AND JAMES WATSON,
WERE BUILDING
MODELS LIKE THIS.
IT WAS THEIR WAY OF THINKING
ABOUT AND INVESTIGATING
THE STRUCTURE OF A
COMPLEX MOLECULE
THAT'S FOUND IN THE
GENES OF ALL ANIMALS: DNA.
THE CRUCIAL BIT ARE THESE
CHAINS WHICH ENCIRCLE THE ROD.
AND HERE IS A SECOND,
AND ENTWINE.
THIS IS A
DOUBLE HELIX.
THE WORKINGS OF THE
DNA MOLECULE ARE NOW
UNDERSTOOD IN SUCH DETAIL
THAT WE CAN DEMONSTRATE
SOMETHING THAT IS
TRULY ASTOUNDING.
A GENE TAKEN FROM ONE ANIMAL
CAN FUNCTION IN ANOTHER.
THE GENE THAT CAUSES THE
JELLYFISH TO BE LUMINOUS,
FOR EXAMPLE,
TRANSPLANTED INTO A MOUSE
WILL MAKE THAT
MOUSE LUMINOUS.
THE GENETIC CODE CAN
ALSO REVEAL RELATIONSHIPS.
EVEN OUR LAW COURTS ACCEPT THAT
DNA FINGERPRINTING CAN ESTABLISH
WHETHER A MAN IS THE
FATHER OF A PARTICULAR CHILD.
AND IT CAN ALSO REVEAL
WHETHER ONE KIND OF ANIMAL
IS RELATED
TO ANOTHER.
IT PROVES, FOR EXAMPLE,
THAT KANGAROOS,
GROUND LIVING ANIMALS
THAT RUN WITH GREAT LEAPS,
ARE CLOSELY
RELATED TO KOALAS
THAT HAVE TAKEN
TO CLIMBING TREES;
THAT INSECT-EATING SHREWS HAVE
COUSINS THAT TOOK TO THE AIR
IN SEARCH OF
INSECTS: BATS.
AND THAT ONE BRANCH OF THE
ELEPHANT FAMILY WAY BACK IN
GEOLOGICAL HISTORY TOOK TO THE
WATER AND BECAME SEA COWS.
SO 150 YEARS AFTER THE
PUBLICATION OF DARWIN'S
REVOLUTIONARY BOOK, MODERN
GENETICS HAS CONFIRMED
ITS FUNDAMENTAL TRUTH:
ALL LIFE IS RELATED.
AND IT ENABLES US TO
CONSTRUCT WITH CONFIDENCE
THE COMPLEX TREE THAT
REPRESENTS THE HISTORY OF LIFE.
IT BEGAN IN THE SEA SOME
3,000 MILLION YEARS AGO.
COMPLEX CHEMICAL MOLECULES
BEGAN TO CLUMP TOGETHER
TO FORM MICROSCOPIC
BLOBS: CELLS.
THESE WERE THE SEEDS FROM WHICH
THE TREE OF LIFE DEVELOPED.
THEY WERE ABLE TO SPLIT,
REPLICATING THEMSELVES
AS BACTERIA DO.
AND AS TIME PASSED
THEY DIVERSIFIED
INTO DIFFERENT GROUPS.
SOME REMAINED
ATTACHED TO ONE ANOTHER
SO THAT THEY
FORMED CHAINS.
WE KNOW THEM
TODAY AS ALGAE.
OTHERS FORMED HOLLOW
BALLS WHICH COLLAPSED UPON
THEMSELVES, CREATING A
BODY WITH AN INTERNAL CAVITY.
THEY WERE THE FIRST
MULTI-CELLED ORGANISMS.
SPONGES ARE THEIR
DIRECT DESCENDANTS.
AS MORE
VARIATIONS APPEARED,
THE TREE OF LIFE GREW
AND BECAME MORE DIVERSE.
SOME ORGANISMS BECAME MORE
MOBILE AND DEVELOPED A MOUTH
THAT OPENED
INTO A GUT.
OTHERS HAD BODIES
STIFFENED BY AN INTERNAL ROD.
THEY UNDERSTANDABLY
DEVELOPED SENSE ORGANS
AROUND THEIR
FRONT END.
A RELATED GROUP HAD BODIES
THAT WERE DIVIDED INTO SEGMENTS
WITH LITTLE PROJECTIONS ON
EITHER SIDE THAT HELPED THEM
TO MOVE AROUND
ON THE SEA FLOOR.
SOME OF THESE SEGMENTED
CREATURES DEVELOPED HARD
PROTECTIVE SKINS WHICH GAVE
THEIR BODIES SOME RIGIDITY.
SO NOW THE SEAS WERE FILLED WITH
A GREAT VARIETY OF ANIMALS.
AND THEN AROUND 450 MILLION
YEARS AGO SOME OF THESE ARMORED
CREATURES CRAWLED UP OUT OF THE
WATER AND VENTURED ONTO LAND.
AND HERE THE TREE OF LIFE
BRANCHED INTO A MULTITUDE OF
DIFFERENT SPECIES THAT
EXPLOITED THIS NEW ENVIRONMENT
IN ALL KINDS OF WAYS.
ONE GROUP OF THEM DEVELOPED
ELONGATED FLAPS ON THEIR BACKS
WHICH OVER MANY GENERATIONS
EVENTUALLY DEVELOPED INTO WINGS.
THE INSECTS HAD ARRIVED.
LIFE MOVED INTO THE AIR AND
DIVERSIFIED INTO MYRIAD FORMS.
MEANWHILE, BACK IN THE SEAS,
THOSE CREATURES WITH THE
STIFFENING ROD IN THEIR
BODIES HAD STRENGTHENED IT
BY ENCASING IT IN BONE.
A SKULL DEVELOPED WITH A
HINGED JAW THAT COULD GRAB
AND HOLD ON TO PREY.
THEY GREW BIGGER AND DEVELOPED
FINS EQUIPPED WITH MUSCLES
THAT ENABLED THEM TO SWIM
WITH SPEED AND POWER.
SO FISH NOW DOMINATED
THE WATERS OF THE WORLD.
ONE GROUP OF THEM
DEVELOPED THE ABILITY
TO GULP AIR FROM
THE WATER'S SURFACE.
THEIR FLESHY FINS BECAME
WEIGHT-SUPPORTING LEGS
AND 375 MILLION YEARS AGO
A FEW OF THESE BACKBONED
CREATURES FOLLOWED THE
INSECTS ONTO THE LAND.
THEY WERE AMPHIBIANS
WITH WET SKINS
AND THEY HAD TO RETURN TO
WATER TO LAY THEIR EGGS.
BUT SOME OF THEIR DESCENDANTS
EVOLVED DRY, SCALY SKINS
AND BROKE THEIR
LINK WITH WATER
BY LAYING EGGS WITH
WATER-TIGHT SHELLS.
THESE CREATURES, THE REPTILES,
WERE THE ANCESTORS OF TODAY'S
TORTOISES, SNAKES,
LIZARDS, AND CROCODILES.
AND OF COURSE THEY
INCLUDED THE GROUP THAT,
BACK THEN, CAME TO DOMINATE
THE LAND: THE DINOSAURS.
BUT 65 MILLION YEARS AGO A GREAT
DISASTER OVERTOOK THE EARTH.
WHATEVER ITS CAUSE, A GREAT
PROPORTION OF ANIMALS
WERE EXTERMINATED.
ALL THE DINOSAURS DISAPPEARED
EXCEPT FOR ONE BRANCH
WHO'S SCALES HAD BECOME
MODIFIED INTO FEATHERS.
THEY WERE THE BIRDS.
WHILE THEY SPREAD
THROUGH THE SKIES
A SMALL, SEEMINGLY INSIGNIFICANT
GROUP OF SURVIVORS
BEGAN TO INCREASE IN NUMBERS
ON THE GROUND BENEATH.
THESE CREATURES, DIFFERENT
FROM THEIR COMPETITORS IN THAT
THEIR BODIES WERE WARM AND
INSULATED WITH COATS OF FUR,
THEY WERE THE
FIRST MAMMALS.
WITH MUCH OF THE
LAND LEFT VACANT
AFTER THE GREAT CATASTROPHE
THEY NOW HAD THEIR CHANCE.
THEIR WARM, INSULATED BODIES
ENABLED THEM TO BE ACTIVE
AT ALL TIMES - AT NIGHT AS
WELL AS DURING THE DAY;
AND IN ALL PLACES, FROM
THE ARCTIC TO THE TROPICS;
IN WATER AS
WELL AS ON LAND;
ON GRASSY PLAINS
AND UP IN THE TREES.
THERE CAN BE NO DOUBT
ABOUT OUR CLOSE RELATIONSHIP
TO THESE CHIMPANZEES.
OUR BODIES
ARE SO SIMILAR.
THE PROPORTIONS OF OUR LIMBS
OR OUR FACES MAY DIFFER,
BUT OTHERWISE WE
ARE VERY, VERY SIMILAR.
THE ARRANGEMENT OF OUR INTERNAL
ORGANS, THE CHEMISTRY OF OUR
BLOOD, THE WAY OUR BODIES WORK -
ALL THESE ARE ALMOST IDENTICAL,
AND DNA CONFIRMS THAT.
INDEED, WE ARE AS CLOSELY
RELATED TO CHIMPANZEES
AND THE REST OF THE APES
AND MONKEYS AS, SAY,
LIONS ARE TO TIGERS AND TO
THE REST OF THE CAT FAMILY.
SUDDENLY AN IMAGE
FROM OUR REMOTE PAST
COMES VIVIDLY
TO LIGHT.
THE TIME WHEN OUR DISTANT
ANCESTORS, IN ORDER TO
KEEP UP WITH THE CHANGING
ENVIRONMENT, HAD TO WADE
AND KEEP THEIR HEADS ABOVE
WATER IN ORDER TO FIND FOOD.
THAT CRUCIAL MOMENT WHEN
OUR FAR DISTANT ANCESTORS
TOOK A STEP AWAY FROM BEING APES
AND A STEP TOWARDS HUMANITY.
THE NATURAL HISTORY
MUSEUM IS ONE OF THE MOST
IMPORTANT MUSEUMS OF
ITS KIND IN THE WORLD.
RICHARD OWEN BROUGHT IT INTO
EXISTENCE, BUT OVER A CENTURY
LATER, DISCOVERIES FROM
MANY BRANCHES OF SCIENCE
HAVE SHOWN THAT HIS BELIEF
THAT SPECIES CAN NEVER CHANGE
BUT ALWAYS REMAIN EXACTLY
THE SAME WAS MISTAKEN.
IT WAS CHARLES DARWIN'S
PROFOUND INSIGHTS
THAT HAVE
PROVED TO BE TRUE.
AND NOW, TO MARK THE 200TH
ANNIVERSARY OF HIS BIRTH,
HIS STATUE IS BEING TAKEN FROM
ITS OUT-OF-THE-WAY LOCATION
TO BE PLACED CENTER
STAGE IN THE MAIN HALL.
DARWIN'S GREAT INSIGHT
REVOLUTIONIZED THE WAY
IN WHICH WE
SEE THE WORLD.
WE NOW UNDERSTAND WHY THERE ARE
SO MANY DIFFERENT SPECIES,
WHY THEY ARE DISTRIBUTED IN THE
WAY THEY ARE AROUND THE WORLD,
AND WHY THEIR BODIES
AND OUR BODIES ARE SHAPED
IN THE WAY
THAT THEY ARE.
BECAUSE WE UNDERSTAND THAT
BACTERIA EVOLVE, WE CAN DEVISE
METHODS OF DEALING WITH
THE DISEASES THEY CAUSE.
AND BECAUSE WE CAN DISENTANGLE
THE COMPLEX RELATIONSHIPS
BETWEEN ANIMALS AND PLANTS
IN A NATURAL COMMUNITY,
WE CAN FORESEE SOME OF
THE CONSEQUENCES WHEN WE
START TO INTERFERE
WITH THOSE COMMUNITIES.
BUT ABOVE ALL, DARWIN HAS
SHOWN US THAT WE ARE NOT
APART FROM THE
NATURAL WORLD.
WE DO NOT HAVE
DOMINION OVER IT.
WE ARE SUBJECT TO ITS LAWS AND
PROCESSES AS ARE ALL OTHER
ANIMALS ON EARTH TO
WHICH INDEED WE ARE RELATED.